---
title: 'Custom ODS LaTeX Tagsets in SAS'
date: 2020-09-02
permalink: /posts/2020/09/Custom-ODS-LaTeX-Tagsets-in-SAS/
---

**Case**

I was using PROC REPORT along with ODS tagsets.simplelatex in SAS to generate LaTeX tables, but some of the tables created this way were too wide to fit on a page. To make the tables fit, I needed to change the width of some columns. An example of edits that need to be made to a tex file:

Change

```
\begin{longtable}{|l|l|l|}
```

to

```
\begin{longtable}{|p{0.75\textwidth}|l|l|}
```

Initially, we decided to make such changes by manually editing the tex files, but soon realized that with a dozen such tables that needed to be updated regularly, an automated process was more desirable. We wondered if it was possible to dictate the column widths in SAS.

**Solution**

I first tried to change the WIDTH and CELLWIDTH option in PROC REPORT, but neither had an effect on the LaTeX table. 

So I decided to create my own custom tagsets based on [original LaTeX tagsets code](https://support.sas.com/rnd/base/ods/odsmarkup/latex.html).

```
proc template;
 define tagset Tagsets.style1;
    map = '%$&amp;{}~^#_\';
    mapsub= '/\%/\$/\&amp;/\{/\}/\~/\^/\#/{\textunderscore}/\newline/';
 	define event colspec_entry;
 		put 'p{0.75\textwidth}|' /if cmp(just, "l");
 		put 'p{0.1\textwidth}|' /if cmp(just, "r");
 		put 'p{0.2\textwidth}|' /if cmp(just, "c");
		put 'l|' /if cmp(just, "d");
 	end;
 parent = tagsets.simplelatex;
 end;
run;
```
Compare the code above to snippets of the original tagsets code.

```
define tagset tagsets.latex;
    notes 'This is the LaTeX definition';
    stacked_columns = no;
    output_type = 'latex';
    map = '%$&amp;{}~^#_\';
    mapsub= '/\%/\$/\&amp;/\{/\}/\~/\^/\#/{\textunderscore}/{\textbackslash}/'
```

```
define tagset tagsets.simplelatex; parent=tagsets.latex;

    define event colspec_entry;
        put just '|' / if !cmp(just, 'd');
        put 'r|' / if cmp(just, 'd');
    end;
```

A few things to note:
* I also changed the map and mapsub lines since in some cases I wanted to add a line break to the column header, and being able to map <code>\</code>  in SAS to <code>\newline</code> in LaTeX was convenient. 
* I set multiple column widths options based on the value of <code>just</code>, which gives me more flexibility, especially in cases where a single table consists of columns that need to be of different widths. However, to use the <code>just</code> option, I had to switch to using <code>PROC TEMPLATE</code> instead of <code>PROC REPORT</code>, which required further modification of my original code.


**Conclusion**

The solution presented above did resolve my needs, but I ended up having to create three custom tagsets to satisfy all the unique requirements of my tables. I think there is perhaps an easier and more elegant solution out there, but I couldn't find much relevant information online. The fact that this is my first time using SAS probably added to the difficulty of finding a solution.
